+++
author = "Geoji Paul"
categories = ["Security"]
date = 2023-04-04
description = ""
draft = false
image = "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1594825137561-1c6aaed0e73f?ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8&auto=format&fit=crop&w=1963&q=80"
slug = "SecOps-ScopeCreep"
summary = "Examining the common reasons for Scope Creep in Security Operations"
tags = ["Security"]
title = "Scope Creep in SecOps"
+++

### Scope Creep In SecOps

In his book "The Goal," Eliyahu M. Goldratt suggests that manufacturing companies should have only one goal: to make money. Anything that goes against this goal is a waste and should be eliminated.

In the information security industry, SOC (Security Operations Center) and CSIRT (Computer Security Incident Response Team) are considered part of the Operations function. If we apply Goldratt's philosophy to SecOps, which we define narrowly as SOC and CSIRT, what is the goal of SecOps? The answer is to stop the attacker or threat as early as possible. For the SOC, the Goal is to identify the attack as quickly as possible, and for the CSIRT, it is to contain the attack as quickly as possible. Anything that is contrary to the Goal of stopping the threat is a waste and should be removed from the scope of these teams.

Frequently, we observe SecOps teams assuming peripheral duties that do not align with their Goal. A prime example of this phenomenon, albeit a contentious one, is data loss prevention (DLP). In many companies, DLP is leveraged as a means to mitigate privacy risks by supervising the transmission of confidential information outside the organization, such as personally identifiable information (PII), payment card information (PCI), protected health information (PHI) etc. I contend that if a corporation utilizes DLP solely for the purpose of minimizing privacy risks, then the SOC should not be tasked with monitoring it. This is because SOC analysts are not equipped to make privacy assessments. SOC analysts typically assess whether an event could have security implications, and they are not typically trained to identify privacy incidents. Therefore, mandating a SOC team (whose expertise is exclusively security-related) to monitor DLP will have a detrimental effect on their operations. Because privacy regulations are multifaceted and differ by industry and geographic location, this approach will primarily result in undetected privacy incidents. Although it may give a false sense of privacy, in actuality, it will increase both privacy and security risks. Untrained personnel may overlook privacy risks, and the surplus of alerts generated by DLP may inundate valuable security alerts. Unless the SOC's mission is explicitly defined, privacy training is provided, and additional staff members are added to the team, assigning DLP monitoring to the SOC is not advisable

Another instance of a misaligned function in the Security Operations team is the enforcement of mandates from other teams that are not related to security. Oftentimes, SecOps fails to ask the crucial question of "which Policy are we enforcing?" This question should be posed by operational leaders as it is essential in preventing scope creep in SecOps. An example of this would be HR or Legal Policies regarding employees engaging in inappropriate browsing activity, such as watching pornography, gambling, or engaging in illegal activities. While monitoring and investigating such behavior may be necessary, it may not necessarily pose an Information Security risk to the organization. The question remains, who is responsible for monitoring these activities and making judgments on them? I would contend again that Security Analysts who are trained to make Security judgements are not, and should not be responsible for making judgment on HR or Legal Policies. 

Yet another example of the misalignment of functions in the Security Operations team can be seen in the spillover of IT Operations into Security Operations, particularly in the area of asset management. Often, security teams are tasked with functions such as re-procuring lost or stolen devices, fulfilling termination requests, or managing the "conference bridge" simply because they are the only 24x7 team in the company. Leaders must ask why these functions should fall under the purview of SecOps. For instance, if a device is encrypted, why should the SOC freeze or wipe it? Could the HelpDesk not take care of this task? Similarly, should not the Identity and Access Management (IAM) team be responsible for executing terminations instead of the SOC? Asking such questions can help ensure that the functions of the Security Operations team are appropriately aligned and that they are not burdened with tasks that could be better handled by other teams.

Goldratt's suggestion to eliminate all non-value added activities is based on the concept of opportunity cost, which is the cost incurred by forgoing one option over another. When manufacturing resources are involved in activities that do not contribute to the production of the final product, the company incurs an opportunity cost. Similarly, when the Security Operations (SecOps) team engages in activities that do not directly contribute to “stopping the threat”, the company incurs an opportunity cost in the form of added Security Risk. For instance, if SOC analysts spend their time triaging alerts related to privacy violations or HR policy violations, or tracking down lost assets, they are not focused on identifying and addressing security alerts. As a result, the company may miss critical security incidents, which can lead to severe consequences.

Upon reading this far, one may naturally wonder whether this approach will result in a lack of collaboration or create silos within the Security Operations team. However, I do not believe that setting well-defined boundaries equates to a lack of collaboration. While the SecOps team should certainly collaborate with other departments such as Privacy, HR, and IT (forming a Fusion Center is an effective approach to accomplish collaboration and information sharing), it is crucial that expectations are clearly defined and resources and training are provided before integrating additional functions. Leaders must shift from implicit assumptions of duties to explicit expectation setting to establish a well-functioning Operations organization.
